worldwide over 1.5 billion people
experience armed conflict in response
people are forced to see their country
leaving over 15 million refugees
children without a doubt are the most
innocent and vulnerable victims but not
just from the obvious physical dangers
but from the often unspoken effects that
wars have on their families the
experience of the war leave children at
a real high risk for the development of
emotional and behavioral problems
children as we can only imagine will
feel worried threatened been at risk but
there is good news the quality of care
that children receive in their families
can have a more significant effect on
their well-being than from the actual
experiences of war that they have been
exposed to so actually children can be
protected by warmth secure parenting
during and after conflicts in 2011 I was
a first year PhD student in the
University of Manchester school of
psychological sciences like many of you
here I watched the crisis in Syria
unfold in front of me on the TV my
family are originally from Syria and
very early on I lost several family
members in really horrifying ways I sit
and I gather with my family and watch
the TV so we've all seen those scenes
bombs destroying buildings chaos
destruction and people screaming and
running it was always the people
screaming and running that really got me
the most especially those terrified
looking children I was a mother to young
typically inquisitive children they were
five and six and at an age where they
typically are lots and lots of questions
and expect real convincing answers
so I began to wonder what it might be
like to parent my children in a war zone
and a refugee camp with my children
change
with my daughter bright happy I use
their shine with my sons really relaxed
and carefree nature becomes fearful and
withdrawn how would I cope would I
change a psychologist and parent
trainers we know that arming parents
with skills in caring for their children
can have a huge effect on their
well-being we call this parent training
so the question I had was could parent
training programs too useful for
families while they were still in war
zones or refugee camps could we reach
them with advice for training that would
help them through these struggles so I
wrote my PhD supervisor professor Rachel
Calum was the idea of using my academic
skills to make some change in the real
world I wasn't quite sure exactly I
wanted to do she listened carefully and
patiently and then to my joy she said if
that's what you want to do and it means
so much to you then let's do it but find
ways to see if parent programs can be
useful for families in these contexts so
for the past five years myself and my
colleagues professor Calum and dr. Kim
Cartwright have been working on ways to
support families that have experienced
war into placements now to know how to
help families that have been through
conflict support their children the
first step must obviously be to ask them
what they're struggling with right it
seems obvious but it's often those that
are the most vulnerable that we're
trying to support that we actually don't
ask how many times have we just assumed
we know exactly the right thing that's
going to help someone or something
without actually asking them first so I
traveled to refugee camps in Syria and
in Turkey and I start with families and
I listened I listened to their parenting
challenges I listened to their parenting
struggles and I listened to their calls
for help and sometimes that was just
paused as all I could do was hold hands
with them and just join them in silent
crying a prayer they told me about those
struggles they told me about the rough
harsh refugee camp conditions
that made it hard to focus on anything
but practical chores like collecting
clean water he told me how they watch
their children withdraw the sadness
depression anger bedwetting
thumb-sucking fear of loud noises fear
of nightmares terrifying terrifying
nightmares
these families had been through what we
had been watching on the TV the mothers
almost half of them were now widows of
war or didn't even know if their
husbands were dead or alive
describes how they felt they were coping
so badly they watch their children
change and we had no idea how to help
them they didn't know how to answer
their children's questions but I found
incredibly astonishing and so
motivational was that these families
were so motivated to support their
children despite all these challenges
they faced they were trying to help
their children they were making attempts
at seeking support from NGO workers from
refugee camp teachers professional
medics other parents one mother I met
had only been the count for four days
and had already made two attempts that
seeking support for her eight-year-old
daughter who was having terrifying
nightmares but sadly the descents are
almost always useless refugee camp
doctors when available are almost always
too busy or don't have the knowledge all
the time for basic parenting support
refugee camp teachers and other parents
are just like them part of the new
refugee community who's struggling with
uni so then we began we began to think
how could we help these families the
families were struggling with things
much bigger than they could cope with
the Syrian crisis made it clear how
incredibly impossible it would be to
reach families on an individual level
how else could we help them how would we
reach families at the population level
and low cost in these terrifying
terrifying time after hours of speaking
to NGO workers one suggested a fantastic
innovative idea of distributing
parenting
information leaflets buy a bread
wrappers bread wrappers that were being
delivered to families in a conflict zone
in Syria by humanitarian workers so
that's what we did the bread wrappers
haven't changed at all in their
appearance except for the addition of
two pieces of paper one was a parenting
information leaflet that had basic
advice and information that normalized
to the parents what they might be
experiencing and what their child might
be experiencing and information on how
they could support themselves and their
children such as information like
spending time talking to your child
showing them more affection being more
patient with your child talking to your
children the other piece of paper was
the feedback questionnaire and of course
there was a pen so in simply leaflet
distribution or is it actually a
possible means of delivering
psychological first aid that provides
warmth secure loving parenting we
managed to distribute three thousands of
these in just one week what was
incredible was we had a 60 percent
response rate 60 percent of the 3,000
families responded I don't know how many
researchers we have here today but that
kind of response rate is fantastic to
have that in Manchester would be a huge
achievement let alone in a conflict zone
in Syria really highlighting how
important these kinds of messages worth
families
remember how excited and eager we were
for the return of the questionnaires the
families had left kinda the messages
most incredibly positive encouraging
when my favorite has got to be thank you
for not forgetting about us and our
children this really illustrates the
potential means of a delivery of
psychological first aid to families and
the return of feedback Toombs
just imagine replicating this using
other means such as baby look
distribution or female hygiene kits or
even food baskets but let's bring this
closer to home because the refugee
crisis is the one that's having an
effect on every single one of us we're
bombarded with images daily of
statistics and of photos and that's not
surprising because by last
month over 1 million refugees had
reached Europe 1 million refugees are
joining our communities they're becoming
our neighbors their children are
attending our children's schools so
we've adapted the leaflet to meet the
needs of European refugees and we have
them online open access in areas with a
really high refugee influx for example
the Swedish health care uploaded it onto
their website within the first 45
minutes it was downloaded for 343 times
we'll be highlighting how important it
is for volunteers practitioners and
other parents to have open access like
logical first aid messages in 2013 I was
sitting on the cold hard floor of a
refugee camp tent with mother sitting
around me as I was conducting a focus
group across from Easter and elderly
lady with what seemed to be a 13 year
old girl lying beside her with her head
on the elderly lady's knees the girl
stayed quiet throughout focus-group not
talking at all with her knees held up
against her chest towards the end of the
focus group and as I was thanking the
mothers for their time the elderly lady
looked at me while pointing at the young
girl and said to me can you help us with
not quite sure what she expected me to
do I looked at the young girl and smiled
and in Arabic I said phenomena calm
should smoke what's your name she looked
at me you really confused and I'm
engaged but instead her lured her lewin
is the pet name for the arabic female
named hala and it only really used to
refer to really young girls at that
point I realized that actually Hannah
was probably much older than 13 it turns
out Hannah was a 25 year old mother to
three young children Hannah had been a
confident bright bubbly loving caring
mother to her children but the war had
changed all about she has lived through
bombs dropped being dropped in her town
she had lived through explosions when
fighter jets were flying around their
building dropping bombs her children
would be screaming terrified from the
noise Hollywood
frantically grab pillows and cover her
children's is to block out the noise
all the while screaming herself when
they reach the refugee camp and she knew
they was finally in some kind of safety
she completely with dreams to acting
like her old childhood self she
completely rejected her family her
children her husband China simply could
no longer cope now this is a parenting
struggle with a really tough ending but
sadly it's not uncommon those who
experience armed conflict and
displacement will face serious emotional
struggles and that's something we can
all relate to if you have been through a
devastating time in your life if you
have lost someone or something you
really care about how would you continue
to cope could you still be able to care
for yourself and for your family given
that the first use of a child's life are
crucial for healthy physical and
emotional development and that 1.5
billion people are experiencing armed
conflict many of whom are now joining
our communities we cannot afford to turn
a blind eye to the needs of those who
are experiencing war and displacement we
must prioritize these family needs to
those those birnley internally displaced
and those who are refugees worldwide
these needs must be prioritized by NGO
workers policy makers the w-h-o the
UNHCR and every single one of us in
whatever capacity it is that we function
in a society when we begin to recognize
the individual faces of the conflicts
when we begin to notice those intricate
emotions on their faces we begin to see
them as humans too we begin to see the
needs of these families and these are
the real human needs
when these family needs are prioritized
interventions for children in
humanitarian settings will prioritize
and recognize the primary role of the
family in supporting children family
mental health will be shouting loud and
clear
mobile international agenda and children
will be less likely to enter social
service systems in resettlement
countries because their families would
have had support earlier on and we will
be more open-minded more welcoming more
caring and more trusting to those who
are joining our communities we need to
stop Wars we need to build a world where
children can dream of planes dropping
gifts and not bomb until we start armed
conflicts raging throughout the world
families will continue to be displaced
leaving children vulnerable but by
improving parenting and caregiver
support it may be possible to weaken the
links between war and psychological
difficulties in children and their
families thank you